# Chapter 7: Kernel Engineering and FlashAttention

_Source pages: PDF pages 27-30_



--- Page 27 ---

Efficient LLM Inference CHAPTER 7. KERNEL ENGINEERING AND FLASHATTENTION
Chapter 7
KernelEngineeringandFlashAttention
7.1 Why Custom CUDA Kernels Matter
High-level frameworks like PyTorch compose operations from library primitives: a linear
layer is a call to torch.nn.Linear, which calls into cuBLAS for the GEMM, then writes
results to HBM, then reads them back for the next operation. Thiseager execution model
creates massive HBM traffic for intermediate tensors that could have been kept in fast on-chip
memory.
Kernel fusion combines multiple operations into a single GPU kernel, keeping inter-
mediate results in registers or shared memory and avoiding HBM round-trips. For a fused
LayerNorm+Linear+GeLUkernel, wereduceHBMtrafficby3 ×comparedtothreeseparate
kernels.
7.2 FlashAttention: IO-Aware Exact Attention
Standard attention materializes the fulln × n attention matrix in HBM:
S = QK⊤
√dk
, P = softmax(S), O = PV
For n = 16,384 and FP16, this matrix is16,3842 × 2 ≈ 537 MB. Reading and writing this
matrix to HBM takes∼0.5 ms on an A100 — and this must happen twice per forward pass
(once for P computation, once for the backward pass during training).
FlashAttention (Dao et al., 2022) eliminates this bytiling: decomposing the attention
computation into blocks that fit in SRAM, computing the numerically stable softmax incre-
mentally using the online softmax trick, and never materializing the full attention matrix in
HBM.
FlashAttention Complexity
Standard Attention FlashAttention
HBM reads/writes O(n2) O(n2/M) (fewer passes)
SRAM usage O(n2) O(M ) (tile size)
Speed Baseline 2–4 × faster
Sequence length limit HBM limited Longer contexts feasible
FlashAttention-2 (Dao, 2023) improved parallelism by splitting the work across thread
blocks along the sequence length dimension and reducing non-matrix-multiply operations.
FlashAttention-3 (Shah et al., 2024) further exploits H100-specific features: asynchronous
memory copies with WGMMA (Warpgroup Matrix Multiply Accumulate) instructions and
FP8 precision, achieving∼75% of H100 peak FLOP/s utilization.
AI Engineering Insider 23


--- Page 28 ---

Efficient LLM Inference CHAPTER 7. KERNEL ENGINEERING AND FLASHATTENTION
7.3 The Online Softmax Trick
The core mathematical challenge of tiling attention is computing the exact softmax when we
process the sequence in chunks. The online softmax (Milakov & Gimelshein, 2018) maintains
a running maximumm and a running sumℓ to compute the softmax without seeing all values
first:
mi = max(mi−1, max
j
sij), ℓ i = emi−1−miℓi−1 +
X
j
esij −mi
At the end, O = Orunning/ℓ gives the exact softmax output. This is numerically stable
and requires onlyO(1) extra state per row of the attention matrix.
7.4 Triton: Pythonic Kernel Programming
CUDA kernel development requires expertise in C++ and GPU-specific optimizations. Triton
(Tillet et al., 2019) is a Python-based DSL for writing GPU kernels that abstracts away low-
level details while generating highly optimized code:
1 import triton
2 import triton . language as tl
3
4 @triton . jit
5 def f u s e d _ s o f t m a x _ k e r n e l (X , Y , stride , N ,
6 BLOCK : tl . c on st ex pr ) :
7 row = tl . p r o g r a m _ i d (0)
8 x_ptrs = X + row * stride + tl . arange (0 , BLOCK )
9 x = tl . load ( x_ptrs , mask = tl . arange (0 , BLOCK ) < N )
10 x_max = tl . max (x , axis =0)
11 x = x - x_max
12 nu me ra to r = tl . exp ( x )
13 d e n o m i n a t o r = tl . sum ( numerator , axis =0)
14 y = num er at or / d e n o m i n a t o r
15 tl . store ( Y + row * stride + tl . arange (0 , BLOCK ) ,
16 y , mask = tl . arange (0 , BLOCK ) < N )
Triton handles shared memory allocation, warp-level synchronization, and vectorization
automatically, allowing ML engineers to write high-performance kernels without deep CUDA
expertise.
Interview Preparation — Mock Q&A
Q7.1. Explain why FlashAttention is faster than standard attention. What is
the key bottleneck it addresses?
Answer:Standard attention materializes the fulln×nattention matrix (QK⊤) in HBM.
For long sequences, this matrix can be hundreds of megabytes to gigabytes, and read-
ing/writing it to HBM is the dominant cost — not the actual arithmetic. FlashAttention
is faster because it isIO-aware: it tiles the attention computation into blocks that fit in
the GPU’s on-chip SRAM (shared memory), computing the softmax incrementally using
the online softmax trick. Intermediate results stay in fast SRAM and are never written
to HBM. The final output for each block is accumulated and written to HBM once. The
AI Engineering Insider 24


--- Page 29 ---

Efficient LLM Inference CHAPTER 7. KERNEL ENGINEERING AND FLASHATTENTION
HBM traffic is reduced fromO(n2) to O(n · d), matching the theoretical minimum for
reading inputs and writing outputs. On an A100, FlashAttention achieves 2–4× speedup
over standard attention for long sequences.
Q7.2. What is kernel fusion and why does it improve inference performance?
Answer: Kernel fusion is the combination of multiple computational operations (that
would normally each launch a separate GPU kernel) into a single kernel that retains in-
termediate results in on-chip memory (registers or shared memory) rather than writing
them to HBM between operations. Without fusion: each operation writes its output to
HBM, and the next reads it back — creating redundant memory traffic. With fusion:
intermediate tensors live in registers or shared memory at>10 TB/s effective bandwidth
rather than the 2–3 TB/s of HBM. Common fusion patterns in LLM inference: (1) QKV
projection fused with RoPE application; (2) LayerNorm fused with the following lin-
ear layer; (3) SiLU/GeLU gating fused with the FFN up-projection. Fused kernels in
TensorRT-LLM and vLLM can reduce kernel launch overhead and HBM traffic simulta-
neously, yielding 10–40% latency improvements over unfused baselines.
Q7.3. How does the online softmax trick enable tiled attention computation?
Answer: The standard softmax softmax(x)i = exi/P
j exj requires seeing all values in
the row before computing any output, precluding tiling. The online softmax processes
the row in chunks, maintaining a running maximumm and exponential sum ℓ. When
a new chunk arrives with valuesx′: (1) Update running max: m′ = max( m, max(x′));
(2) Rescale existing sum:ℓ′ = ℓ · em−m′
+P ex′
j −m′
; (3) Rescale existing output:O′ =
O · em−m′
/ℓ′ + V′ · ex′−m′
/ℓ′. At completion,O′ equals the exact softmax-weighted sum.
This enables FlashAttention to processQ, K, V in tiles, producing exact results without
materializing the full attention matrix.
Q7.4. What improvements did FlashAttention-3 introduce for the H100, and
how does it exploit H100-specific features?
Answer: FlashAttention-3 was specifically engineered for the H100’s new hardware ca-
pabilities: (1) WGMMA (Warpgroup Matrix Multiply Accumulate): The H100
introduced new asynchronous matrix multiply instructions at the warpgroup level, allow-
ing FA3 to overlap memory copy and compute operations within a tile, hiding memory
latency; (2)TMA (Tensor Memory Accelerator): Hardware-managed asynchronous
transfers between HBM and shared memory, reducing software overhead for data move-
ment; (3)FP8 support: FA3 supports FP8 attention computation, doubling the effec-
tive Tensor Core throughput for attention; (4)Ping-pong pipelining: Two warpgroups
alternate between loading the next tile and computing on the current tile, keeping both
the Tensor Cores and memory system fully busy. Together, FA3 achieves∼75% of the-
oretical peak H100 FLOP/s on attention, vs.∼35% for FA2.
Q7.5. When would you use Triton instead of writing raw CUDA? What are
the trade-offs?
Answer: I’d useTriton when: (1) I need a custom kernel (e.g., a novel fused opera-
tion) but the team lacks deep CUDA expertise; (2) The kernel is “medium complexity”
— not a simple elementwise operation (covered by PyTorch) but not requiring hand-
tuned warp-level primitives; (3) Rapid iteration is important — Triton’s JIT compilation
means I can experiment quickly. Triton’sadvantages: Python syntax, automatic shared
memory tiling, simpler debugging, and generated code that is often within 10–20% of
AI Engineering Insider 25


--- Page 30 ---

Efficient LLM Inference CHAPTER 7. KERNEL ENGINEERING AND FLASHATTENTION
hand-optimized CUDA for many workloads. I’d useraw CUDAwhen: (1) Maximum
performance is critical (e.g., the attention kernel in FlashAttention which requires ex-
tremely precise control of memory access patterns and warp synchronization); (2) I need
fine-grained control over warp-level primitives, bank conflict avoidance, or asynchronous
copy pipelines (TMA/WGMMA on H100). The trade-off is development time (CUDA:
weeks; Triton: days) vs. peak performance.
AI Engineering Insider 26